Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is a free,
complete course for the CCNA. If you like these
videos, please subscribe to follow along with the
series. Also, please like and leave a comment,
and share the video to help spread this
free series of videos. Thanks for your help.
In this video we will cover NAT, Network Address
Translation. NAT is a very important topic for the
CCNA exam and for real-world network engineering.
NAT is used to translate the source and/or
destination IP address of a packet to a different
IP address. NAT is covered in exam topic 4.1,
which says you must be able to configure and
verify inside source NAT using static and pools.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video. First,
I’ll talk about private IPv4 addresses.
These are IP addresses which you are
free to use in your internal networks
and which don’t have to be globally unique. Then
I’ll introduce NAT and its purpose. After that
I’ll cover one type of NAT you need to know for
the CCNA, static NAT, and how to configure it.
This video will be part 1 of NAT. I’ve
decided to split NAT up into two videos
instead of one long video, because it’s an
important topic that I don’t want to rush.
So, in Day 45 I will cover some additional
NAT topics you need to know for the CCNA.
As always, watch until the end of the
video for a bonus practice question
from Boson Software’s ExSim, the
best practice exams for the CCNA.
First let me introduce private IPv4 addresses.
This is review from the IPv6 videos in
this course, but IPv4 doesn’t provide
enough addresses for all devices that
need an IP address in the modern world.
The long-term solution to this problem is to
switch to IPv6, but changing networks all over
the world from IPv4 to IPv6 is no simple task. So,
before we switch completely over to IPv6, there
are some short-term solutions to this problem,
which have actually extended the lifespan of IPv4
quite a lot. The first one, which you already
know, is CIDR, Classless Inter-Domain Routing.
With CIDR we can forget about the rigid IPv4
address classes and are free to use any prefix
length with any address, no need to think about
classes. Then there are two other very important
solutions which I will cover in this video.
Private IPv4 addresses and NAT. RFC 1918 specifies
the following IPv4 address ranges as private.
Now, before I show the address ranges, ‘RFC’ means
Request For Comments. These are the documents
that are used to set standards for the Internet.
I’ve mentioned that once or twice before I think,
I just wanted to make it clear. Okay, so the first
private IPv4 address range is 10.0.0.0/8,
which includes 10.0.0.0 to 10.255.255.255.
The second one is 172.16.0.0/12, which
includes 172.16.0.0 to 172.31.255.255.
Finally there is 192.168.0.0/16, which
includes 192.168.0.0 to 192.168.255.255.
You probably recognize these address ranges,
I use them a lot in my course for example
networks and labs. So, they specified
one range of addresses from class A,
one range of addresses from class B, and one range
of addresses from class C. Now, I’m sure some of
you will be thinking ‘why is the class B range
/12? Isn’t class B /16? And why is the class C
range /16? Isn’t class C /24’? The answer to those
questions is that these are simply address ranges.
172.16.0.0/12 just specifies a range of
addresses from 172.16.0.0 to 172.31.255.255,
and you’re free to divide up those addresses
however you want and use them in your network.
Likewise, 192.168.0.0/16 just specifies a range
of addresses from 192.168.0.0 to 192.168.255.255,
and once again you are free to divide
up those addresses in any way you want.
In any case, don’t be too attached to the concept
of address classes. In modern networks everyone
uses CIDR, Classless Inter-Domain Routing,
so address classes are a thing of the past.
So, those are the private IPv4 address ranges. You
are free to use these addresses in your networks,
they don’t have to be globally unique. In fact, if
you’re watching this video from a PC in your home,
it’s almost certainly using a
private IP address. For example,
my PC has the IP address 192.168.0.167, and
its default gateway, my router, is 192.168.0.1.
Your PC might have the exact same IP address as
mine, or at least it might be in the same subnet,
192.168.0.0/24. Now, here’s an important point.
Private IP addresses cannot be used over the
Internet. Your ISP, Internet Service Provider,
will drop traffic to or from private IP addresses.
You may be wondering, if the private IP
addresses can’t be used over the Internet,
how can I access the Internet from my PC?
That’s where NAT comes in. Let me demonstrate.
On the left is my PC, 192.168.0.167, connected
to my router, 192.168.0.1. Somewhere across the
Internet there is another PC connected to a
router, and they have the same IP addresses.
Without NAT, there are two big problems here.
The first is that there are duplicate addresses.
If there is a packet traveling over the Internet
with the destination address 192.168.0.167,
which PC will it go to? My PC? Or the
other one with the same IP address?
So, that’s a problem. Another problem is that
private IP addresses can’t even be used over the
Internet, so the PCs can’t access the Internet.
However NAT solves both of these problems for us.
Although the PCs and the routers’ internal
interfaces have identical private addresses,
perhaps my router’s external interface has the
public IP address 203.0.113.1, and the other
router has the public IP address 203.0.113.5. This
is important. Although the private IP addresses
aren’t unique, the public IP addresses must be
unique. When my PC needs to reach destinations
over the Internet, NAT will allow it to borrow the
unique public IP address of my router, or another
public IP address I have configured for NAT. In
fact, not just my PC, but all other devices in my
home can use that same single public IP address
to access the Internet, all at the same time.
So my PC can borrow my router’s IP address and
communicate over the Internet using 203.0.113.1,
and the other PC can communicate over
the Internet using 203.0.113.5. Anyway,
I’ll explain NAT next. Regarding private IP
addresses, remember the RFC number 1918, remember
the three private IP address ranges, and remember
that they can’t be used over the Internet.
So let’s talk about NAT. NAT is used to modify the
source and/or destination IP addresses of packets.
And why would you want to do that? Well there are
various reasons to use NAT, but the most common
reason is to allow hosts with private IP addresses
to communicate with other hosts over the Internet,
as I introduced in the previous That is in
addition to allowing multiple internal hosts
to share a single public IP address, but
I’ll demonstrate how that works in day 45.
There are also various types of NAT, but for the
CCNA you have to understand source NAT and how
to configure it on Cisco routers. Let me give
a brief demonstration of how source NAT works.
PC1’s IP address is 192.168.0.167, and it wants
to communicate with the server at 8.8.8.8.
So, it creates a packet with source IP
192.168.0.167 and destination 8.8.8.8.
It sends the packet to its default gateway, R1.
This is where the NAT happens. R1 translates
the source IP address from 192.168.0.167 to
203.0.113.1, the IP address of its external
interface. That’s why it’s called ‘source’ NAT,
because it translates the source IP address.
Note that, in this case R1 translated PC1’s
IP to the IP address of its own interface,
203.0.113.1, but that’s only one option. There are
many different kinds of NAT. In fact, I’ll cover
this type of NAT, where the router’s interface
IP address is used, in the next video, day 45.
Static NAT, which I’ll cover in this
video, doesn’t use the router’s IP address,
it uses a separate address, which you’ll see in
the next Anyway, R1 then sends the packet out to
the Internet and it arrives at its destination,
8.8.8.8. Now the server will send a reply.
The source is 8.8.8.8, and the destination
is 203.0.113.1. It sends the packet to R1,
which then reverses the translation.
203.0.113.1 is translated back to 192.168.0.167.
Although in this case the destination IP is
being changed, this isn’t destination NAT. R1
is just reverting the previously translated
address back to PC1’s actual IP address.
And then finally the server’s response reaches
PC1. So, that’s a brief introduction to NAT,
specifically source NAT, translating
the source IP address of a packet.
Now let’s look deeper into one specific
kind of source NAT, static source NAT.
So, here’s static NAT. Static NAT involves
statically configuring one-to-one mappings of
private IP addresses to public IP addresses. Now,
it doesn’t have to be private to public. You can
NAT any address to any other address, but to keep
things simple let’s think of it as mapping one
private IP to one public IP. An inside local IP
address is mapped to an inside global IP address.
These are two important terms to understand, not
just for static NAT but for all types of NAT I’ll
introduce. First, what does ‘inside’ mean?
It refers to the router’s internal network,
as opposed to outside networks such as the
Internet. So, what is an inside local address?
It is the IP address of the inside host, from the
perspective of the local network. So, it’s the
IP address actually configured on the inside
host, which is usually a private IP address.
That ‘inside local’ address is
translated to an ‘inside global’ address,
which is the IP address of the inside host from
the perspective of ‘outside’ hosts, hosts outside
of the local network. So, that’s the IP address of
the inside host after NAT, and is usually a public
IP address. Let me demonstrate. PC1 wants
to communicate with the server at 8.8.8.8.
So it makes a packet with destination IP address
8.8.8.8 and source IP address 192.168.0.167.
This is the inside local address, it’s the IP
address actually configured on PC1, and it is
indeed a private IP address. It sends the packet
to its default gateway R1, which performs source
NAT to change it to, for example, 100.0.0.1. Note
that in static NAT we aren’t using R1’s interface
IP, this is a separate public IP address reserved
just for PC1. This is the inside global IP of PC1.
It’s PC1’s IP address after NAT is performed, and
it’s a public IP address. R1 then sends the packet
over the Internet to 8.8.8.8, which then sends the
reply. Note that, from the server’s perspective
it’s communicating with IP address 100.0.0.1, even
though PC1’s actual IP address is 192.168.0.167.
So, the ‘inside global’ address is the IP address
of the inside host, PC1, from the perspective of
outside hosts, for example the server. It’s
not the actual IP address configured on PC1.
So, R1 reverses the translation back to PC1’s
inside local address, and sends it to PC1.
Now, what if PC2 also wants to communicate
over the Internet with 8.8.8.8?
Notice that I defined static
NAT as being ‘one-to-one’.
On R1 I mapped PC1’s private IP address
192.168.0.167 to the public IP address 100.0.0.1.
That’s a one-to-one mapping. But if PC2 also wants
to reach 8.8.8.8, it will need its own IP address.
The router would not allow me to map both PC1 and
PC2’s IP addresses to 100.0.0.1 using static NAT.
So, in this case I configured R1 to translate
PC2’s IP address, 192.168.0.168, to 100.0.0.2.
What’s the name for 192.168.0.168? It’s the inside
local address, the actual IP address configured on
PC2. And what’s the name for 100.0.0.2? It’s the
inside global address, PC2’s IP address after NAT.
Anyway, the server sends the reply to 100.0.0.2,
and R1 translates it back to 192.168.0.168
and sends the reply back to PC2. So, that’s
basically how static NAT works. Now, I have
to point something out about static NAT. Static
NAT allows devices with private IP addresses to
communicate over the Internet. However, because
it requires a one-to-one IP address mapping,
it doesn’t really help preserve IP addresses.
If each internal device needs its own public IP
address anyway, you might as well just configure
a public IP address on the device itself. So,
although there are reasons to use static NAT, for
our purposes it’s not the most useful kind of NAT.
Now let’s look at how to configure static
NAT, only a few commands are needed.
First, define the inside interface or
interfaces by using the IP NAT INSIDE
command from interface configuration mode. In
this network, R1’s inside interface is G0/1,
it’s connected to the internal network.
So I used IP NAT INSIDE on G0/1. Likewise,
I used the IP NAT OUTSIDE command on G0/0 to
define it as the outside interface. R1 will
perform NAT on traffic traveling from the inside
interface, G0/1, to the outside interface, G0/0.
Then configure the one-to-one IP address mappings.
The command is IP NAT INSIDE SOURCE STATIC,
followed by the inside local IP address
and then the inside global IP address.
So, I mapped 192.168.0.167 to 100.0.0.1,
and 192.168.0.168 to 100.0.0.2. So, PC1’s
IP address will be translated to 100.0.0.1, and
PC2’s will be translated to 100.0.0.2. Note that,
because these are public IP addresses, to use
them you have to actually own them, they must
be registered to you or your company. You can’t
just freely use any public IP address you want,
like you can with private IP addresses. Finally
I used the command SHOW IP NAT TRANSLATIONS.
This is a very useful SHOW command for NAT. Let
me point out some important things here. First,
when static NAT is used you will see the entries
permanently displayed in the translations table.
Personally I think the inside local address
should be displayed first on the left
and then the inside global, but it’s the
opposite. Inside global and then inside local.
So, these two entries are permanent, but then
whenever NAT is actually performed on R1,
when the addresses are actually translated,
dynamic entries for those translations will also
appear in this table. For example, I sent
some traffic from PC1 and PC2 to 8.8.8.8,
so you can see these two entries. Let’s
look at each column, from left to right.
On the left is the ‘Pro’, protocol
column, indicating that UDP was used.
Then the inside global address column. Notice that
next to each IP address there is a colon followed
by a number. What do you think that number
is? It’s the port number. For static NAT, you
don’t have to pay too much attention to the port
numbers, but in day 45 we’ll look at PAT, Port
Address Translation, and you’ll see the importance
of these port numbers for NAT. Okay, next is the
inside local address column. Notice that, even
though the IP addresses have been translated,
R1 doesn’t translate the port numbers when using
static NAT. They remain the same. Okay, these
last two columns introduce two new terms, outside
local and outside global. Let me explain those.
So, you already know about the ‘inside
local’ and ‘inside global’ addresses.
The ‘outside local’ address is the IP address
of the outside host from the perspective of
the local network. So, for example from PC1’s
perspective, the server’s IP address is 8.8.8.8,
so that’s the outside local IP address. And the
‘outside global’ address is the IP address of
the outside host from the perspective of
the outside network, the outside hosts.
In this case, the server’s actual IP address is
8.8.8.8, so as you can see both of these are the
same, the outside local address and the outside
global address. Unless destination NAT is used,
these two addresses will always be the same.
Destination NAT is beyond the scope of the
CCNA exam, so for our purpose you can
expect these two to always be the same.
By the way, notice that the port number is also
indicated for these, and they’re using port 53.
So, what service did PC1 and PC2 use to access
the server? They used DNS, which uses UDP port 53,
and sometimes TCP port 53. So, these four terms,
inside local, inside global, outside local,
and outside global, can be a little confusing,
but make sure you understand the difference.
‘Inside’ and ‘outside’ indicate the location
of the host, on the inside network or the
outside network. PC1 and PC2 are ‘inside’,
and the server at 8.8.8.8 is ‘outside’.
Local and global, on the other hand, indicate the
perspective. ‘Local’ means from the perspective of
the local, inside network. ‘Global’ means from
the perspective of the global, outside network.
So, 192.168.0.167 is PC1’s IP address
from the perspective of the local network,
and 100.0.0.1 is PC1’s IP address from
the perspective of the global network.
If you have any questions about these terms,
feel free to ask in the comment section.
Let me show a few more useful commands.
First, you can clear all of the dynamic
translations in the NAT translation table with
CLEAR IP NAT TRANSLATION, and then an asterisk.
Even though I only configured static NAT, not
dynamic NAT, each time the static NAT entries are
actually used, dynamic entries are added to the
NAT translation table for those translations. When
PC1 and PC2 stop communicating with 8.8.8.8, these
dynamic entries will eventually time out and be
removed from the NAT translation table, but this
command allows you to manually clear the table.
Notice that, after using that command
the two dynamic entries are gone,
but the static entries remain. These static
NAT entries won’t time out and can’t be deleted
unless you remove the IP NAT INSIDE
SOURCE STATIC commands from the router.
The last command I want to show you today is
this, SHOW IP NAT STATISTICS. Let’s walk through
the first few lines of the output. Total active
translations 2, and both of them are static.
Since I just cleared the dynamic
entries, there aren’t any at the moment.
As for extended entries,
I’ll explain them in day 45.
Peak translations is 4, that’s the highest
number of translations that have been
in R1’s NAT table. Here you can see the outside
interface, g0/0, and the inside interface, g0/1.
So, here are the new commands from this video.
If you don’t remember any of these commands,
make sure to go back in the video to review. Also,
I recommend practicing these configurations
either by making your own labs in packet tracer,
or by trying my practice labs. The
static NAT lab will be in the next video.
Okay, before the quiz let’s review what we
studied today. First I introduced private
IPv4 addresses. Make sure you know
those three private IP address ranges,
10.0.0.0/8, 172.16.0.0/12, and 192.168.0.0/16.
Then I gave an introduction to NAT in general.
NAT allows routers to modify the source
and/or destination addresses of packets.
But for the CCNA, you just need to learn
source NAT. Then we looked at one type of
source NAT, static source NAT, which involves
manually configuring one-to-one mappings of
private IP addresses to global IP addresses.
Finally, we looked at how to configure static NAT.
Static NAT configuration is fairly simple.
Just specify the inside and outside interfaces,
and then configure the IP address mappings. I
think that the bigger challenge of this video
is understanding those four terms: inside local,
inside global, outside local, and outside global.
But we’ll cover NAT again in the next video, so
if some things are unclear, don’t worry about it.
Also, at the end of the quiz there will be a bonus
question from Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA,
so make sure to watch until the end.
Okay, let’s go to quiz question 1.
Which of the following commands will configure
a static source NAT mapping of 192.168.10.10
to 203.0.113.10? Pause the video now to
check the options and select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is D, IP NAT INSIDE SOURCE
STATIC, followed by the inside local address which
is usually a private address, and then the inside
global address, which is usually a public address.
This will map 192.168.10.10 to
203.0.113.10. Okay, let’s go to question 2.
You have configured the following command
on R1, IP NAT INSIDE SOURCE STATIC 10.0.0.1
20.0.0.1. What will happen when you issue
the following command on R1? IP NAT INSIDE
SOURCE STATIC 10.0.0.2 20.0.0.1. Pause
the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is B, only 10.0.0.1 will
be translated to 20.0.0.1. Why is that?
I briefly mentioned earlier in the video that,
if you have already statically mapped a private
IP address to a public IP address, if you try to
map another private IP to that same public IP,
the command will be rejected. Here’s what that
looks like. The second command is rejected,
so only 10.0.0.1 will be translated to 20.0.0.1.
If you want to configure static NAT for 10.0.0.2,
you’ll need to use a different public IP
address. Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Examine the following partial
SHOW command output on R1.
How many active translations will there be
if you issue the CLEAR IP NAT TRANSLATION
(asterisk) command on R1? Pause the
video now to select the correct answer.
Okay the answer is B, 3. CLEAR IP NAT TRANSLATION
will clear only the dynamic translations,
not the 3 static translations. So,
even after issuing the command,
3 translations will remain.
Okay, let’s go to question 4.
Which of the following are private IPv4 addresses?
(select all that apply). Pause the video
now to select all of the correct answers.
Okay, the correct answers are A, 10.254.255.0,
E, 172.20.2.3, and F, 10.11.12.13.
Those are the only three addresses that fall
within the private IPv4 address ranges as
specified in RFC 1918. 10.0.0.0/8, 172.16.0.0/12,
and 192.168.0.0/16. Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Examine the packet flow below as PC1
pings 8.8.8.8 and receives a reply.
Identify each of the following addresses
in this situation from R1’s perspective.
So, identify the outside global, outside local,
inside local, and inside global addresses.
If you were to use the command
SHOW IP NAT TRANSLATIONS on R1,
which address would appear in each column?
Pause the video now to think about the answers.
Okay let’s check. The outside global and outside
local addresses are both 8.8.8.8. These will
only be different if destination NAT is used,
and that’s outside of the scope of the CCNA.
The inside local address is 172.20.0.101.
That’s the IP address of the inside host, PC1,
from the perspective of the inside network.
And the inside global address is 200.0.0.1.
That’s the IP address of the inside host, PC1,
from the perspective of the outside network.
Once again, make sure you know
these different terms well.
If you’re confused, go back in the video to
review, try a Google search on the topic,
and of course feel free to ask questions in
the comment section. Okay, that’s all for
the quiz. Next let’s take a look at a bonus
question in Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.
Okay here's today's Boson ExSim practice question.
You issue the SHOW IP NAT TRANSLATIONS command
on RouterA and receive the following partial
output. So there are 2 entries in RouterA's
NAT translation table. HostA establishes a
TFTP connection with HostB. What is the IP
address of HostA? Select the best answer.
So, these are the six options to choose from.
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay let's check. So, I believe the correct answer
is 10.20.30.55. Now how did I decide that? Well,
it is a TFTP connection from HostA to HostB. So
how do we know which one is the TFTP connection,
which of these entries? We can look at the
protocol. TFTP uses UDP, not TCP. And TFTP's
destination port is 69, not 23. So we know it
is this top entry. Now how do we know which
of these addresses is HostA's address? So the
question isn't 100% clear. It says what is the
IP address of HostA? It doesn't say inside global
or inside local, so which one is HostA's address?
Well if you get a question like this, it's safe
to assume that it's asking about the actual IP
address of HostA. Not the NAT address configured
on RouterA. So it's not the inside global address,
which is HostA's IP address after NAT. It's asking
for the inside local address. HostA's IP address
before NAT, the actual IP address configured on
HostA. So that's why I think 10.20.30.55 is the
correct answer. So I will click on show answer.
And yes that is correct. So here is Boson's
explanation. I highly recommend reading this
explanation, so pause the video now to do that.
And there's some more down here at the bottom,
as well as some links to Cisco documentation.
Okay, so that was a quick look at Boson Software's
ExSim for CCNA. These are, without a doubt,
the best practice exams for the CCNA, and I highly
recommend them. If you want to get Boson ExSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
There are supplementary materials for this video.
There is a flashcard deck to
use with the software ‘Anki’.
There will also be a packet tracer practice
lab so you can get some hands-on practice.
That will be in the next video. Sign up for my
mailing list via the link in the description,
and I’ll send you all of the flashcards
and packet tracer lab files for the course.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members. To join,
please click the ‘Join’ button under the video.
Thank you to Pavel, Abraham, Serge, Njoku, Viktor,
Roger, Raj, Kenneth, Seamus, H W, Brandon, Samil,
Aaron, Marcel, Kone, Donald, C Mohd, Gustavo,
Anthony, Junhong, Benjamin, Tshepiso, Justin,
Prakaash, Nasir, Erlison, Marko, Daming, Ed,
Value, John, Funnydart, Velvijaykum, Mark, Yousif,
Boson Software, Devin, Lito, Yonatan, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at the
time of recording by the way, March 18th 2021.
If you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future videos.
Thank you for watching. Please
subscribe to the channel,
like the video, leave a comment, and share the
video with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links in the
description. I'm also a Brave verified publisher
and accept BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips
via the Brave browser. That's all for now.